Project 2025 lays out how a far-right president would utilize buyout programs to
encourage civil servants to take early retirement. Project 2025 argues against buyouts under
certain circumstances because they are often not cost effective, particularly if a new employee is
hired to replace the bought-out one. Nevertheless, following the hiring freeze in the Trump
administration, OMB instructed agencies to examine the use of buyout programs, “encouraging
early retirements in order to shift costs from current budgets in agencies to the retirement system
and minimize the number of personnel fired. The EPA immediately implemented such a program.
[Central Personnel Agencies: Managing The Bureaucracy, Project 2025, p. 78]

Project 2025 calls for using the SCOTUS anti-race-conscious admissions verdict to prohibit all
environmental justice-related grant making. “Allocations of agency resources, increased EPA
enforcement, and/or agency distribution of grants should be based on neutral constitutional principles. In
2023, the Supreme Court is expected to provide guidance on the constitutionality of race-based
discrimination as it considers Students for Fair Admissions v. University of North Carolina.54 Accordingly,
the next Administration should pause and review all ongoing EJ and Title VI actions to ensure that they
are consistent with any forthcoming SCOTUS decision.” [Environmental Protection Agency, Project 2025,
accessed 6/24/24]

Project 2025 plans to halt grant-making to universities and institutions involved in climate
research. “Steps should be taken to ensure that grants are awarded based on need instead of ideological
affiliation or academic preference. Specifically, EPA should:Institute a pause and review for all grants
over a certain threshold. Put a political appointee in charge of the grants office to prioritize distribution of
grants to those who are most in need and toward projects that will tangibly improve the environment. Cap
the number and dollar amounts of grants that the Office of Research and Development can award and
require that they be reviewed by the Administrator’s office.” [Environmental Protection Agency, Project
2025, accessed 6/24/24

Environmental Protection Agency:
● Disbands multiple parts of the EPA, including Office of Environmental Justice and External Civil
Rights, Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assistance. [
	○ Makes the drastic reduction of the EPA’s size and scope, with a focus on “compliance
	over enforcement” a topline priority.
	○ Downsizes and dismantles key programs that protect public health and the environment,
	with dire consequences for environmental justice.
		■ Prevents the distribution of billions of dollars in IRA climate investments that
		combat the climate crisis and strengthen community resilience, severely limit and
		filter scientific research on climate modeling and development of mitigation
		strategies.
		■ Guts EPA authority and oversight of air and water pollution, rid polluters and
		other entities of environmental accountability.
		■ Prevents the reduction in millions of metric tons of GHGs and legacy pollution in
		communities across the nation.
		■ Provides legal grounds to completely topple Justice40 and other environmental
		justice programs within the EPA and likely across other agencies.
	○ Day One Executive Order to slash EPA’s capabilities and weaken its rules.
	○ Most broadly, the plan would downsize EPA by cutting the budget, staff and programs,
	and “pause and review” major rules and guidance that protect the environment and public
	health, in order to weaken those protections.


Environment
Toplines
✔ Slashes EPA’s capabilities and rescinds Biden-era protections
✔ Disbands Office of Environmental Justice and External Civil Rights
✔ Reverses the Good Neighbor Plan, which secured significant reductions in ozone-forming
emissions from power plants and industrial facilities
✔ Undermines the effective cleanup of toxic superfund sites
✔ Significantly expands drilling sites without regard for environmental impacts
✔ Removes protections from national monuments and parks
✔ Puts wildlife at risk


EPA
CAP Analysis of Project 2025 on the EPA
Day One Executive Order to slash EPA’s capabilities and weaken its rules
Most broadly, the plan would downsize EPA by cutting the budget, staff and programs, and “pause and
review” major rules and guidance that protect the environment and public health, in order to weaken
those protections.
Consequences:
● Undermine the ability of EPA to safeguard human health and the environment, especially in
communities with the highest levels of pollution and climate change threats.
● End or weaken essential environmental and public health protections.
Disband the Office of Environmental Justice and External Civil Rights (OEJECR)
The newly established OEJECR leads the agency’s environmental justice priorities and provides
resources and technical assistance on civil rights and environmental justice, community engagement,
addressing environmental justice concerns, and support for community-led action. The dissolution of this
office would rid the EPA of services and expertise in alternative dispute resolution, environmental conflict
resolution, consensus-building, and collaborative problem solving for EJ communities.
Consequences:
● Increases household energy and health care costs. Preventing the distribution of $2.7
billion in IRA funding to tackle environmental injustices, and more than $50 million in
grant funding for community-based organizations, will undermine efforts to clean up
pollution in communities and increase energy and health care costs.
● Kills jobs. Dissolving this new national office would upend 5 EJ offices and 200 jobs in
EPA headquarters across 10 regions that have been dedicated to solving national
environmental challenges.
● Increases pollution and worsens climate, environmental, and public health risks in
communities. The plan stops the nearly $3 billion for environmental and climate justice
grants supporting community-led air pollution monitoring and prevention, as well as
97
efforts to protect communities from climate change and extreme weather, heat, and
wildfires.
● Undermines EPA’s ability to safeguard human health and the environment, especially in
communities with the highest levels of pollution and climate change threats. The plan
prevents the OEJECR from coordinating and implementing environmental justice
priorities and Justice40 across the agency, including reducing and cleaning up toxic
pollution historically concentrated in communities of color and low-income areas.
● Kneecaps enforcement of environmental regulations, community protections, and federal
civil rights laws. The plan would pull the plug on technical assistance for and coordination
of environmental justice and civil rights priorities, deny communities the ability to raise
environmental justice concerns with EPA, and undercut enforcement of federal civil rights
laws.
Reverse the Good Neighbor Program’s 2022 expansion beyond power plants
The Good Neighbor Plan “secures significant reductions in ozone-forming emissions of nitrogen oxides
from power plants and industrial facilities.” In the final rule, 20 states are covered for both fossil-fuel fired
power plants and “other industrial stationary sources.” These “other industries” include basic chemical
manufacturing, combustion engines in pipeline transportation of natural gas, kilns in cement production,
boilers in iron and steel mills, and solid waste combustors and incinerators.
Approximately 130 million Americans (40% of U.S. population) live within 50 km of non-power plant
facilities, and the demographic make up of populations within 5-10 km is 6% higher for African Americans
and 2-4% higher for people living in poverty. Reversing the inclusion of other industries would undo
emissions reductions in the ozone season, annual nitrous oxide emissions, particulate matter, sulfur
dioxide, and downwind pollution from industrial facilities, and prevent the reduction of legacy pollution in
disadvantaged communities.
Consequences:
● Increases healthcare costs. Excluding other industries would reverse pollution compliance
benefits of up to $15 billion by 2026, and prevent net benefits of up to $200 billion between 2023
and 2042.
● Increases pollution and worsens environmental and public health risks to communities. The plan
would prevent a 15% reduction in industrial nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions, increase NOx
emissions by 45,000 tons from other covered industrial sources, increase annual sulfur dioxide
emissions by 29,000 tons, annual fine particle emissions by 1,000 tons, and annual carbon
dioxide emissions by 16 million metric tons. Exclusion of other industries would also decrease
visibility in national and state parks and protection for sensitive ecosystems, coastal waters and
estuaries, and forests.
● Increases mortality and disease. In 2026 alone, this proposal could cause 1,300 premature
deaths, more than 2,300 hospital and emergency room visits, and increase asthma cases by 1.3
million.
● Educational and economic impacts: the above increases in mortality and disease would cause an
estimated 430,000 school absence days and 25,000 lost work days.
Project 2025 calls for “Eliminating the stand-alone Office of Enforcement and Compliance
Assistance”
The OECA is charged with formal and informal enforcement of national initiatives that address serious
noncompliance to national environmental laws. OECA has issued emergency orders to plants, refineries,
and other entities for water system lead violations, work safety crimes, sulfur dioxide emissions and oil
releases, chemical plant pollution, and improper hazardous waste disposal. Eliminating the OECA as a
stand-alone office would undermine its crucial oversight and accountability work on behalf of impacted
communities.
Consequences:
● Increases in consumer costs. The plan would prevent the disbursement of $45 billion in non-
federal dollars through EPA’s water infrastructure finance programs.
98
● Jobs killed. Past budget cuts have led to losses of 950 enforcement positions at EPA nationwide
(30% of total OECA workforce), and eliminating OECA could undo the restoration of 200 of these
positions in FY 2023.
● Worsens climate change and local pollution. The plan would lead to a preventable 21% increase
in ozone season emissions of nitrogen oxides from electric power generation, and a preventable
release of 6 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent without EPA pollution prevention
grant funding, and worsen measured air quality by 10% in communities that don’t currently meet
NAAQS.
● Increases public health risks and environmental injustice in communities. Eliminating OECA could
cause 2,250 lung cancer deaths annually from unabated radon exposure, block technical
assistance to 2,203 Tribal, small, rural, or underserved communities for drinking water and waste
treatment improvements. It would also prevent an increase in inspections in areas of EJ concern
to 45% in fiscal year 2022, 50% in FYs 2023 and 2024, and 55% in FYs 2025 and 2026, prevent
the initiation of 45 proactive post-award civil rights compliance reviews, and would exacerbate
discrimination issues in environmentally overburdened and underserved communities.
Project 2025 details “Immediate and consistent rejection of all EPA Office of Research and
Development [ORD] and science activities that have not been authorized by Congress”
This measure would prohibit the use of scientific determinations to drive regulatory, enforcement, and
legal decisions in the EPA and federal government. Requiring the congressional review and authorization
of ORD science activities—which span across 3 offices, 4 research centers, 6 research programs and
countless partnerships across industries, academic institutions, trade associations, other agencies, state
government and NGOs—would slow, if not completely hinder, the ORD’s ability to deliver accurate,
relevant, science-based risk assessments to the American public.
Consequences:
● Harms economic, scientific, and educational progress. The plan would cut over $800 million for
scientific research, technology, and education on the climate crisis and Earth’s natural systems.
● Undercuts our nation’s ability to understand, prepare for, and build resilience to climate change
and more extreme weather. The plan would stymie scientific advancements in climate change
adaptation including carbon storage, fish population conservation, and wildfire and health impact
studies. It would also threaten community preparedness for extreme weather and potentially gut
tools and models that forecast the ecological and mortality impacts of regional ozone
concentrations and pollution.
Threatens public health, safety, and the environment. The plan would halt or limit integrated efforts across
the ORD to publicly release environmental and human health data, advance remediation and restoration
of contaminated sites, support sustainable materials management, and waste recovery and reuse.


Since 1964 Head Start has WORKS. Fuck-pres trump has ended that.
 Eliminates Head Start: Eliminates the Head Start program, which provides preschool
education for over 1 million children in low-income families. Project 2025 also rejects
universal child care.
