Project 2025 calls for eradicating LGBTQ and reproductive health language from all USAID
materials and grants. “In addition, the next conservative Administration should rescind President Biden’s
2022 Gender Policy and refocus it on Women, Children, and Families and revise the agency’s regulation
on “Integrating Gender Equality and Female Empowerment in USAID’s Program Cycle.”10 It should
remove all references, examples, definitions, photos, and language on USAID websites, in agency
publications and policies, and in all agency contracts and grants that include the following terms:
“gender,” “gender equality,” “gender equity,” “gender diverse individu- als,” “gender aware,” “gender
sensitive,” etc. It should also remove references to “abortion,” “reproductive health,” and “sexual and
reproductive rights” and con- troversial sexual education materials.” [Agency for International
Development, Project 2025, accessed 6/24/24

Project 2025: USAID’s next administrator should also be the Director of Foreign Assistance and
oversee all foreign assistance. “The next Administration should take steps to ensure that future foreign
assistance clearly and unambiguously supports the President’s foreign policy agenda. For example, the
next administrator of the U.S. Agency for International Development, which is technically subordinate to
the State Department, should be authorized to take on the additional role of Director of Foreign
Assistance with the rank of Deputy Secretary and oversee all foreign assistance. This role—which existed
briefly during the George W. Bush Administration before it was eliminated by the Obama Administration—
would empower the dual-hatted official to better align and coordinate with the manifold foreign assistance
programs across the federal government.” [Department of State, Project 2025, accessed 6/24/24

Consistent with other chapters, the plan’s USAID section characterizes current efforts to fight global
climate change as “climate extremism” and a “war on fossil fuels,” and it proposes gutting USAID’s
international affairs “150 account” and all programs related to international climate. These cuts would
occur alongside elimination of programs addressing global gender equality and racism. [ch. 9, p. 254.

Project 2025 integrates and Prioritizes Faith Based Initiatives into “all of the Agency’s programs”.
“The next conservative Administration must champion the core American value of religious freedom,
which correlates significantly with poverty reduction, economic growth, and peace. It should train all
USAID staff on the connection between religious freedom and development; integrate it into all of the
agency’s programs,including the five-year Country Development and Coordination Strategies due for
updates in 2025; strengthen the missions’ relationships with local faith-based leaders; and build on local
programs that are serving the poor. Congress should appropriate funding to USAID specifically to support
persecuted religious minorities in line with Executive Order 13926. [Agency for International
Development, Project 2025, page 262]

